---
title: "everything I know about empathy, I learned in prison"
asset: "filename of image (assumes a .jpg extension)" 
category: live
published: false
---

I walked through prison security, concealing fear with a grin. Sure, I volunteered for it, but until that moment I wasn’t completely sure what I signed up for. I dumped the contents of my pockets into a plastic bin and moved through the metal detector. Security guards shuffled me into a small room between two locked doors. There I stood, in the small space between freedom and captivity.
I was about to enter a place I knew little about. 

My understanding of prison was limited to dramatic television portrayals. I pictured gray and rusted jail cells, with women in orange jumpsuits, perhaps cuffed at the wrists. I was afraid of this place. More than that, I was judgmental of this place. I tried my best not to be. But it felt impossible to level the ground between myself and convicted felons. 
This particular prison wasn’t anything like I pictured. The women wore blue collared shirts and white trainers. They were free to roam the grounds during open hours, and they slept in a large common room lined with bunk beds. It felt more like a campus than a prison. Though, there was no forgetting where I was. Guards escorted us from one building to the next. Doors only opened after identification was established via video surveillance. There was no freedom here. I walked the grounds, realizing I had no frame of reference for what I was experiencing. I felt emotionally distant. What was I even doing here? I started to think I didn’t possess the empathy to serve these women well.

Then I met them; the women I volunteered to mentor. Eight of them sat around a table, with one empty seat on the end. That was my seat. Where I would sit shoulder to shoulder with convicted felons, trying to level the space between us. I recalled the training I went through, searching for appropriate topics of conversation. My mind was racing, but the words didn’t come. I sat silently, still concealing fear with a grin. They stared back blankly, waiting for me to speak... waiting for me to lead.
I started with names. Learning their names was a good place to begin. One by one they went around the table. Some told me their first, middle, and last name, as well as their preferred nickname. Others grunted a sound, hardly resembling a proper name. As I penned each one in my notebook, I mentally connected their names and faces. I didn’t want to forget. Over and over I looked down at the paper, and back up at each of them.

All of the sudden, they were no longer distant inmates to me. The lines between us started to fade. Each one had a name and a face. Each face, a story. They were daughters, mothers, sisters, and lovers. As they spoke, I saw pieces of myself in each of them. In that space, I realized there was no me and them. There was only us.
Inside the walls of that prison, I sat among women who committed unspeakable crimes. On the surface, we shared nothing in common. But week after week, as we gathered to share pain and joy, our kinship grew. The more I got to know them, the more my fear of  “other” diminished. That's just the way of fear; it can't survive when we decide to get close. And the closer I got, the more genuine empathy began to pour out of me. My heart was with and for these women. It turns out, I didn’t need to walk in their shoes  in order to feel the load they carried.
Behind bulletproof glass and heavy metal doors, I learned what empathy really was.

--
The yogic virtue of Ahimsa means, “respect for all living things and avoidance of violence towards others.” It is the practice of nonviolence in both thought and action. If ahimsa is respect for all living things, then thoughts of disrespect or judgement violate ahimsa. I find I am quick to judge, when I operate from fear. And I believe fear and violence only have a place, where we perceive “otherness.” Cultivating Ahimsa requires viewing all of humanity as interconnected and united. Where there is unity, there is no fear to provoke violence. And where fear ends, empathy begins. 
I am convinced, empathy is the most powerful tool a yoga instructor can wield. It is the thread connecting teachers who have profoundly impacted my personal journey. They held the space of my mat with empathy, allowing me to expand into the fullness of myself. Empathy is the act of hearing and validating the pain of another, regardless of whether we have experienced the same. I learned, once you strip away the narrative, the pain is still the same. Across cultures, pain is a unifying language. Tears are the hidden language of the soul; a language we all understand. 

True and honest empathy has the power to unite people. But empathy can only change the world, if it spurs us to action. When we possess empathy, we are fully awake to the suffering around us. Fully awake people see the pain of another, and are compelled to act; there is no other way but to respond. This empathetic model of responding to a need, is what birthed YogaQuota.


Anne Mundy, founder of Yoga Quota, decided it wasn’t enough to say “yoga is for everyone,” and hope the studio space spoke for itself. The truth is, most studios are set up for only the most affluent in society. Largely, it’s expensive to practice regularly at a studio. Which means, if studio-based yoga is only accessible to those who can afford it, then it isn’t really for everyone. It’s not for everyone, until it is made available to everyone. 
As a registered charity, Yoga Quota brings yoga to every untouched corner of society. We run and operate as a normal studio would, with clients coming and going around the clock. Our space is modest, and you won’t find showers or a store-front boutique to shop in. But at the heart of our culture, is a chalkboard. On that chalkboard, we tally every person who steps onto a mat. When we hit 50 tallies, we teach a class for free to people who wouldn’t otherwise have access to yoga. Its that simple. Those who can afford to pay for class, contribute to the work of bringing yoga to those who cannot. Presently, we have 29 charity partnerships and teach 16 free classes a week, with numbers growing regularly. We have partner-studios in 3 cities, where they too, work towards a monthly quota of giving. Our partnerships are diverse, allowing us to serve a range of clients from individuals with autism, to homeless members of society. 

My first charity class was at a refuge center for women. Teaching at the center was much different than my other classes. Our practice focused on meditation and pranayama, with very minimal movement. When you’re seeking refuge, it’s a gift to have space to just breathe. During my first month teaching there, one of the women dozed off into a light-sleep during savasana. I could hear the depth of her breathing change as she drifted away. After I gently ended our time, she verbally acknowledged her state of relaxation. She said, “I don’t often get to fully relax. But here I know I am safe, I can let go.” I realized right then, this is my most important work. Creating a safe space where I can hold empathy for another soul; that is why I teach. 
Yoga Quota enables this empathetic transaction; where a teacher from North America can interact with women I wouldn’t have encountered otherwise. I get to reach across cultural and socioeconomic lines and create a shared space. And amid that magic space, I am reminded weekly; we are all the same. At Yoga Quota, yoga really is for everyone. We show up every day to keep expanding the definition of everyone, by bringing yoga to those who need it most. We teach and practice with empathy, knowing it is the most uniting work we can do. 
Because for us at Yoga Quota, labels are superficial. The refugee, the felon, the addict; they are all the same as you and me. We are all one.
